_pages/logging.md, before:

---
layout: page
seo_title: Node.js / TypeScript Logging on AWS for SaaS Products
title: Node.js / TypeScript Logging on AWS for SaaS Products
description: Logging is an essential part of managing your SaaS application. Learn how to implement a best practice logging strategy to be able to quickly discover issues in your product.
tldrs: ["Use a structured format such as JSON to be able to query your logs using CloudWatch Insights", "Add a request ID to your log rows to help you  track down production issues", "Use log levels to avoid cluttering your logs and save CloudWatch cost", "Use a tried and tested logging library such as Winston to implement your logger"]
permalink: /logging/
---

![Logging](/images/logging.png "Logging")

{% include tldr.html %}

Volca is a [SaaS boilerplate template](https://volca.io) that provides support for best practice logging out of the box. Leverage Volca to avoid building your own logging solution and get your product to market faster. Check out the demo [here](https://app.demo.volca.io).

In this article, we will go through how we set up logging for Volca and how you can do the same to get the most out of your logging.

## Why do we need logging?

Imagine you deploy your application to production, everything is going well with your new start-up, but then one of your customers tells you that he is getting some errors while using your product. How do we find out what went wrong?

It's easy to output some logs from your service. But how do we make sure that you are able to find the information you need in your logs? And how do we make sure that we are not generating too many logs?

## What we want to achieve

While logging might sound like the most boring thing ever to implement, it is critical to be able to debug your SaaS application and fix bugs before too many users are affected. In the early stages of building your SaaS, keeping your few customers happy is very important to spread the word and get testimonials to post on your site. Here are the key things that you need to get logging right in a SaaS product:

- Structure
- Traceability
- Log levels


Below, we deep dive into each section.

## Structure

The most basic logs is just simply text strings appended line after line and might look like this:

```
2017-01-27 12:15:32 – Creating new user with username user@volca.io
2017-01-27 12:15:48 – Authentication failed for user someone@mail.com
2017-01-27 12:15:49 – Authentication succeeded for user@volca.io
2017-01-27 12:16:23 – User user@volca.io created a new project
```

This structure is perfectly fine when being read by a human, but it becomes challenging when we want to find logs related to a specific user, or for a specific request. This becomes problematic due to the different formats of the logs. It's also harder to index the logs to make them searchable.

The solution to this is called structured logging. This means that we output the logs in a format that can be easily processed by a machine. Any machine parsable format can be used such as XML or JSON. The most common format is JSON so we will use that in this article.

With structured logging in JSON we would get a format like this:

```json
{
  "timestamp": "2022-10-29 14:52:55.1623",
  "level": "info",
  "message": "authentication failed",
  "username": "user@volca.io",
  "userId": "83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321"
}
```

With this format, it becomes easier to find all logs related to a specific username or userId. Using AWS, we can query for this log row by using CloudWatch Logs Insights. Volca uses a Lambda function to host the API which automatically logs to a CloudWatch Log Group. If we select the log group for our API, we can easily query for all error logs with the below query:

```
fields @timestamp, @message
| filter @message like /error/
| sort @timestamp desc
| limit 20
```

## Traceability

Adding to the structure that we defined above, we introduced a property called `correlationId` in Volca. This is a random string that is sent with every request to our backend that helps us trace what happened during a user session. With this property added, a log row might look like this:

```
{
  "timestamp": "2022-10-29 14:52:55.1623",
  "level": "info",
  "message": "saving entity in database",
  "correlationId": "83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321"
}
```

Let's say we managed to find this log row when troubleshooting an issue in production. Then we can easily find everything that was logged for the request by using the below query in CloudWatch Insights:

```
fields @timestamp, @message
| filter @correlationId='83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321'
| sort @timestamp desc
```

This can save you a lot of time looking for the root cause of production issues.

## Log levels

When it comes to logging, adding more logs is not always better. It's important that we don't clutter our logs since it can make it harder to search them and will require more space and resources to process. If you are using AWS, CloudWatch can actually be one of the largest hidden costs since you pay for every gigabyte of log data stored.

When your service is running in production, it is not likely that you will need fine grained logs that cover everything that happens in your application. Instead, we can use logging that tells us only the really important things. Note that using all of these log levels might be too much when you are just starting out. Our recommendation is to start small with 2-3 log levels of your choosing.

To solve this, we can make use of different log levels. Here is a list of some commonly used levels:

- debug
- info
- warn
- error
- fatal

When using these log levels we will output the level we have configured and all levels above it, so the `warn` level would output any logs with the levels `warn`, `error` and `fatal.

Here are some examples on log messages on the different levels:

### Debug logs

```ts
logger.debug("Entered function authenticate", { username });
```

### Info logs

```ts
logger.info("Authentication succeeded", { username });
```

### Warn logs

```ts
logger.warn("Software license is about to expire");
```

### Error logs

```ts
logger.error("Failed to connect to database", { stacktrace });
```

## Implementing a logger in Node.js / TypeScript

Let's discover how we can implement some structured logging with different log levels in node.js.

First off, let's install a library to help us implement the logging. A popular one with almost 20K stars on GitHub is [winston](https://github.com/winstonjs/winston).

```sh
npm i winston
```

Now, let's set up a simple logger that will produce logs in a JSON format.

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: 'info',
  format: winston.format.json(),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

Next, let's add the `correlationId` property mentioned in the previous section. You can generate this as you wish, in our case we generate a UUID that we attach to each request.

```
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const addCorrelationId = winston.format(info => {
  info.correlationId = getCorrelationId();
  return info;
});


const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: 'info',
  format: winston.format.combine(
    addCorrelationId(),
    winston.format.json()
  ),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger

```

Alright, but what if we want different logging levels in different environments? Let's introduce an environment variable for defining different log levels and let it fallback to `info`. This means we can easily change the log level without redeploying our application if needed.

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: process.env.LOG_LEVEL || 'info',
  format: winston.format.json(),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

These structured logs are really good for our live environments, but they are pretty hard to read when we are developing locally. Let's improve that by supporting different logging formats!

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const simpleLoggingFormat = winston.format.combine(
  winston.format.colorize(),
  winston.format.timestamp({ format: 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:mm:ss' }),
  winston.format.splat(),
  winston.format.printf((info) => {
    const { timestamp, level, message, ...meta } = info;

    return `${timestamp} [${level}]: ${message} ${Object.keys(meta).length ? JSON.stringify(meta, null, 2) : ''}`;
  }));

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: process.env.LOG_LEVEL || 'info',
  format: process.env.LOG_FORMAT === 'json' ? winston.format.json() : simpleLoggingFormat,
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

So there we are. We now have a smooth logger with support for different log levels and formats depending on your needs!

Commit message:

Add testimonial to logging page

_pages/logging.md, after:

---
layout: page
seo_title: Node.js / TypeScript Logging on AWS for SaaS Products
title: Node.js / TypeScript Logging on AWS for SaaS Products
description: Logging is an essential part of managing your SaaS application. Learn how to implement a best practice logging strategy to be able to quickly discover issues in your product.
tldrs:
  [
    "Use a structured format such as JSON to be able to query your logs using CloudWatch Insights",
    "Add a request ID to your log rows to help you  track down production issues",
    "Use log levels to avoid cluttering your logs and save CloudWatch cost",
    "Use a tried and tested logging library such as Winston to implement your logger",
  ]
permalink: /logging/
---

{% include testimonial.html title='Karl, SaaS Founder' image='https://volca.io/images/karl.jpg' content='When I shipped my first SaaS product, it was riddled with bugs ("Minimum Viable Product" 🤠). As my first paying users were coming in, support requests were piling up. After I implemented the logging strategy I outline in this article, I was finally able to squash the bugs one by one and today I rarely get any support requests.' %}

{% include tldr.html %}

Volca is a [SaaS boilerplate template](https://volca.io) that provides support for best practice logging out of the box. Leverage Volca to avoid building your own logging solution and get your product to market faster. Check out the demo [here](https://app.demo.volca.io).

In this article, we will go through how we set up logging for Volca and how you can do the same to get the most out of your logging.

## Why do we need logging?

Imagine you deploy your application to production, everything is going well with your new start-up, but then one of your customers tells you that he is getting some errors while using your product. How do we find out what went wrong?

It's easy to output some logs from your service. But how do we make sure that you are able to find the information you need in your logs? And how do we make sure that we are not generating too many logs?

## What we want to achieve

While logging might sound like the most boring thing ever to implement, it is critical to be able to debug your SaaS application and fix bugs before too many users are affected. In the early stages of building your SaaS, keeping your few customers happy is very important to spread the word and get testimonials to post on your site. Here are the key things that you need to get logging right in a SaaS product:

- Structure
- Traceability
- Log levels

Below, we deep dive into each section.

## Structure

The most basic logs is just simply text strings appended line after line and might look like this:

```
2017-01-27 12:15:32 – Creating new user with username user@volca.io
2017-01-27 12:15:48 – Authentication failed for user someone@mail.com
2017-01-27 12:15:49 – Authentication succeeded for user@volca.io
2017-01-27 12:16:23 – User user@volca.io created a new project
```

This structure is perfectly fine when being read by a human, but it becomes challenging when we want to find logs related to a specific user, or for a specific request. This becomes problematic due to the different formats of the logs. It's also harder to index the logs to make them searchable.

The solution to this is called structured logging. This means that we output the logs in a format that can be easily processed by a machine. Any machine parsable format can be used such as XML or JSON. The most common format is JSON so we will use that in this article.

With structured logging in JSON we would get a format like this:

```json
{
  "timestamp": "2022-10-29 14:52:55.1623",
  "level": "info",
  "message": "authentication failed",
  "username": "user@volca.io",
  "userId": "83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321"
}
```

With this format, it becomes easier to find all logs related to a specific username or userId. Using AWS, we can query for this log row by using CloudWatch Logs Insights. Volca uses a Lambda function to host the API which automatically logs to a CloudWatch Log Group. If we select the log group for our API, we can easily query for all error logs with the below query:

```
fields @timestamp, @message
| filter @message like /error/
| sort @timestamp desc
| limit 20
```

## Traceability

Adding to the structure that we defined above, we introduced a property called `correlationId` in Volca. This is a random string that is sent with every request to our backend that helps us trace what happened during a user session. With this property added, a log row might look like this:

```
{
  "timestamp": "2022-10-29 14:52:55.1623",
  "level": "info",
  "message": "saving entity in database",
  "correlationId": "83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321"
}
```

Let's say we managed to find this log row when troubleshooting an issue in production. Then we can easily find everything that was logged for the request by using the below query in CloudWatch Insights:

```
fields @timestamp, @message
| filter @correlationId='83b7925b-3619-4b74-97da-b8aac0635321'
| sort @timestamp desc
```

This can save you a lot of time looking for the root cause of production issues.

![Logging](/images/logging.png "Logging")

## Log levels

When it comes to logging, adding more logs is not always better. It's important that we don't clutter our logs since it can make it harder to search them and will require more space and resources to process. If you are using AWS, CloudWatch can actually be one of the largest hidden costs since you pay for every gigabyte of log data stored.

When your service is running in production, it is not likely that you will need fine grained logs that cover everything that happens in your application. Instead, we can use logging that tells us only the really important things. Note that using all of these log levels might be too much when you are just starting out. Our recommendation is to start small with 2-3 log levels of your choosing.

To solve this, we can make use of different log levels. Here is a list of some commonly used levels:

- debug
- info
- warn
- error
- fatal

When using these log levels we will output the level we have configured and all levels above it, so the `warn` level would output any logs with the levels `warn`, `error` and `fatal.

Here are some examples on log messages on the different levels:

### Debug logs

```ts
logger.debug("Entered function authenticate", { username });
```

### Info logs

```ts
logger.info("Authentication succeeded", { username });
```

### Warn logs

```ts
logger.warn("Software license is about to expire");
```

### Error logs

```ts
logger.error("Failed to connect to database", { stacktrace });
```

## Implementing a logger in Node.js / TypeScript

Let's discover how we can implement some structured logging with different log levels in node.js.

First off, let's install a library to help us implement the logging. A popular one with almost 20K stars on GitHub is [winston](https://github.com/winstonjs/winston).

```sh
npm i winston
```

Now, let's set up a simple logger that will produce logs in a JSON format.

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: 'info',
  format: winston.format.json(),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

Next, let's add the `correlationId` property mentioned in the previous section. You can generate this as you wish, in our case we generate a UUID that we attach to each request.

```
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const addCorrelationId = winston.format(info => {
  info.correlationId = getCorrelationId();
  return info;
});


const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: 'info',
  format: winston.format.combine(
    addCorrelationId(),
    winston.format.json()
  ),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger

```

Alright, but what if we want different logging levels in different environments? Let's introduce an environment variable for defining different log levels and let it fallback to `info`. This means we can easily change the log level without redeploying our application if needed.

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: process.env.LOG_LEVEL || 'info',
  format: winston.format.json(),
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

These structured logs are really good for our live environments, but they are pretty hard to read when we are developing locally. Let's improve that by supporting different logging formats!

```ts
// src/utils/logger.ts

import winston from 'winston';

const simpleLoggingFormat = winston.format.combine(
  winston.format.colorize(),
  winston.format.timestamp({ format: 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:mm:ss' }),
  winston.format.splat(),
  winston.format.printf((info) => {
    const { timestamp, level, message, ...meta } = info;

    return `${timestamp} [${level}]: ${message} ${Object.keys(meta).length ? JSON.stringify(meta, null, 2) : ''}`;
  }));

const logger = winston.createLogger({
  level: process.env.LOG_LEVEL || 'info',
  format: process.env.LOG_FORMAT === 'json' ? winston.format.json() : simpleLoggingFormat,
  transports: [new winston.transports.Console()],
});

export logger
```

So there we are. We now have a smooth logger with support for different log levels and formats depending on your needs!
